Good afternoon and welcome to
Worldwide Developer Conference.
I'm Craig Keithley.
I'm the USB and FireWire technology
manager in Apple's Worldwide
Developer Relations program.
And I've been working on USB and
FireWire drivers and products
probably for the last four years.
I've worked on just about every different
kind of driver that exists at Apple.
And it's been incredible to watch the
adoption of I/O Kit over the last year.
I've worked with developers internal
to Apple and external to Apple,
and all of them come to me and
tell me how powerful it is,
how useful it is.
The object inheritance model that we
have makes it easy to write drivers
that leverage off of the families
that are in the operating system.
And so to introduce this to you,
describe it to you in depth,
I'd like to bring up Dean Reece.
Dean?
Hi, good afternoon.
I'm Dean Reece.
I manage the I/O Kit team at Apple.
And I don't know how in-depth
we'll be able to get today,
because I/O Kit covers a lot
of API and a lot of ground.
But we'll definitely cover
as much of it as we can,
and there's a whole lot of sessions
for the rest of the week that will
hopefully give you the details you
need to be able to make your products.
So in introduction,
we're going to talk about sort of
the design and the scope of I/O Kit.
I/O Kit is just one word.
It doesn't really tell
you what all it covers.
And it's actually important to
know what fits in I/O Kit and
what doesn't fit in I/O Kit.
We'll talk about kernel extension some,
because that's the basic unit of
delivery for I/O Kit components.
And I'm also going to spend a
little bit of time talking about how
applications can get access to devices.
This is very important, obviously.
If somebody's porting any kind of
application that maybe wants to sync to
a handheld device or touch any kind of
hardware that's out there where a higher
level of abstraction is not appropriate.
So we'll spend some time talking
about the various models for that.
So it's only a couple
sessions into WWDC this year,
but I'm sure you're already
familiar with this slide.
We're going to be
focusing in on the bottom,
the Darwin capsule there.
And to expand on that a little bit,
this is the explosion
of the Darwin kernel,
and there's a lot of components in there.
I/O Kit is just one of them,
and drivers are built based on
I/O Kit primitives and provide
services to the rest of the Core OS,
the Darwin kernel, and the higher level
applications as well.
So, what is I/O Kit?
There's really three views of I/O Kit.
To driver developers,
it's a framework that makes it as
easy as possible to write a driver.
That's our goal is to make it
as easy as possible to write
a device driver for Mac OS X.
And I've got in my definition
here correct Mac OS X drivers.
We've had to spend a lot of time
thinking about the threading model and
the memory management because it's very
different under Mac OS X than it was
under classic Mac OS or even under other
operating systems out there in the world.
So, what we wanted to do was put as
much of that knowledge into one
framework as possible so you didn't
have to go and reinvent all of that.
And that's one of the
fundamental goals of I/O Kit.
To application developers,
I/O Kit presents an abstraction of
hardware and a rendezvous mechanism.
And by rendezvous mechanism,
I mean also arbitration where
you can have one device being
shared between two applications.
There's higher level abstraction services
built higher up in the operating system,
but all of them ultimately boil
down to what I/O Kit allows for
mutual exclusion of devices.
And to the OS,
I/O Kit really serves as an
abstraction of each attached device.
That's sort of its simplest definition.
It tries to provide an abstract object
for each device attached to the system.
Now more from a development perspective,
I/O Kit is a framework and
a collection of families for
developing Mac OS X drivers.
Simply put, that's what it is.
It's a library, but it's a very big
one with a lot of APIs.
It's delivered on the
Mac OS X developer CD,
so there's not a separate SDK or
KDK that you have to download if
you've got the Mac OS X developer CD.
You have I/O Kit.
Now we will be occasionally
posting updates to our website,
but basically go to the CD and you'll
find the developer package there that
contains all of the APIs and I/O Kit.
From a runtime perspective,
I/O Kit is part of the Darwin kernel.
It's compiled into the kernel,
it executes in the kernel address space,
and all of the APIs that I/O Kit presents
are present in the kernel.framework.
That is all the in-kernel
APIs are present there.
The APIs that we present to
application developers are
present in the I/O Kit framework.
Now the distinction here is,
as has been said in previous sessions,
inside the kernel and outside the kernel,
development environments
are very different.
There are different APIs,
there are different rules for threading,
for memory management,
and as a result we have to have
two separate sets of APIs for that.
The I/O Kit in kernel implementation
is an object-oriented design based
on a subset of the C++ language.
Now, the application level bits are
still object-oriented in nature,
but they're straight C.
We don't use C++ for the app-level APIs.
Now, the question of course comes up,
when do I need to use Iocit and when not?
Well, if you're developing a driver that
must run inside the Mac OS X kernel,
and I'll spend a little
more time on that later,
then you're probably going to be
living inside the Iocit framework.
You're going to be
making use of Iocit APIs.
And if you're developing
application that needs to directly
access devices or drivers,
then you're going to make
use of Iocit as well,
not necessarily by subclassing from it,
but by making use of its user-level
APIs to get at the hardware.
Now, not all drivers in
Mac OS X are Iocit drivers.
This is important.
Most of the imaging devices, scanners,
printers, cameras, things like that,
are not managed inside of Iocit.
We really only try to put
things in the kernel that need
to be there for other reasons.
And I'll dive into some of these
details a little bit later.
The design goals of I/O Kit are
pretty straightforward.
It's a very complex task writing a
driver for a system that can run on
MP and have a preemptive scheduling.
You have to deal with multiple
address spaces and also ideally
be architecture neutral,
something that isn't tied to one
particular platform because as you know,
evolution of platforms tends to
maybe render some of those design
decisions inappropriate in a few years.
So we've spent a lot of time
trying to hammer these things out.
Drivers really focus on mechanism.
When you write a device driver,
you're focusing entirely on the bits
of code that are necessary to push
data in and out of a physical device.
Ideally,
we'd like to keep policy out of drivers.
The idea is a driver's there
to move data between the
operating system and a device.
And you really want policy
user experience issues to
be driven at a higher level.
And third-- this is an
important point though.
Third party developers can extend
Mac OS X and I/O Kit just like Apple can.
Through the Darwin open source community,
you can download 95% of the source
code to I/O Kit and its families.
You can develop new families.
You can develop drivers
for existing families.
It's a very flexible model.
And we don't actually do anything
within Apple that we make it
impossible for a third party to use.
Now I/O Kit itself is, as I said, a very,
very large framework and
it contains a lot of API,
a lot of surface area.
Well, just for us to be able to
manage it and think about it,
we had to subdivide it.
And the way we did this is by dividing it
into families and then within families,
multiple drivers.
So I/O Kit, in and of itself,
is just a framework.
It doesn't have any
intrinsic protocol support.
SCSI is not part of the
I/O Kit meta-framework.
It doesn't understand SCSI commands.
The protocol specifics are
embedded into families.
The idea here is you would have
a SCSI family that understands
what it means to be a SCSI device
and a USB family that understands
what it means to be a USB device.
Underneath each one of those families,
The I/O Kit are a collection of drivers,
some of them written by Apple,
some of them written by third parties,
and all the device specifics
are embedded in those drivers.
Now, I-O-Kit families contain
classes that present an
abstract view of a device type.
That's basically what it's
trying to say there is a family
presents the abstraction of
a type of device to the system.
So if all disk drives
fundamentally look the same,
the storage family would
present that abstraction,
and everybody that builds a device driver
underneath that abstraction would inherit
from it and therefore get sort of the
same appearance to the upper layers.
In this way,
upper-level services can look and find
things in I-O-Kit in a common way.
A device driver from one vendor
doesn't look completely different from
a device driver from another vendor if
they are for the same type of device.
Device drivers inherit
the device-independent
details from the family,
and then as a developer,
you fill in the device-dependent pieces.
So just to give you a shopping list
here of some of the common families,
you can see kind of a naming theme here.
And there's plenty more.
This is probably a third of them.
There's also ADB Family and other
somewhat more esoteric ones that
you probably won't ever see.
These are the ones I get most
questions about from developers.
Now, from an object-oriented
class perspective,
drivers in the I/O Kit universe
are leaf classes.
That is, they don't intend to have any
other class inherit from them.
Now, I/O Kit developers, excuse me,
the I/O Kit engineers at Apple who have
built I/O Kit have had to write all
their code with the knowledge that you
people are going to be subclassing them.
So we've had to put a lot of
attention into the subclass interface.
Now, that takes a good bit of discipline
and object-oriented experience
to be able to design a class
that intends to be subclassed.
So, fortunately, you don't have to bother
with that for drivers.
Basically, you write,
you inherit from something we've written,
you write the bits that you need to,
and you don't have to worry about
third parties inheriting from you.
Unless you want to,
and that's a whole other presentation.
Your driver really should focus in on the
requirements of one particular device,
or possibly a collection of
devices that are very similar.
Now there's a data
structure that's in I/O Kit,
it actually exists in
the kernel address space,
called the I/O Registry.
And it's important to understand that
the I/O Registry is not something
that's brought in from a file.
It's never archived on disk.
It is literally the network of
active I/O Kit objects in the system.
And it's roughly a tree structure.
I say roughly, if you browse it through
any of our tools,
like I/O Registry Explorer or I/O Reg,
it will appear as a tree structure.
It is actually possible to
have one node have two parents.
This is done for fan-in devices,
like a soft RAID might choose
to use that for implementation.
So the technical term,
I believe it's a directed acyclic graph,
but basically a tree structure.
Now what it does is it tracks
all of the relationships
between the various objects.
As I said,
the nodes in this graph are the actual
objects that make up your drivers
and the other family components.
And so there are links between them.
There are planes within the I/O registry.
There's a service plane,
which is the one you'll hear about 99% of
the time when you're looking at I/O Kit.
The service plane basically says,
"This object depends on this other
object for some service." And the service
is usually named by the class name.
So I/O PCI device provides a
service to some other driver,
and the service it provides is
access to an I/O PCI device.
I/O Kit tries to mimic the
physical world wherever possible.
Also built into I/O Kit is
the basis for driver matching.
Now, each family can override this
and can change the behavior.
So the example I'm about to walk
through is going to be true,
99% true, for every driver that you see,
but there's always going to
be some slight variation.
So you have to check with the header
files for your family and documentation
that's available for whatever family
you're in to understand how the
matching will be different for you.
It's basically four stages,
and I'll walk through those
in four future slides.
But it's fundamentally a score system.
So effectively you've got some set
of drivers identified as appropriate.
We use scores to try to
figure out which one is best.
It's very powerful and flexible.
There's quite a lot that you
can do to change the way that
matching occurs as needed.
So step one, device discovery.
This is really sort of
before the matching begins.
But during boot,
or when a dynamic bus has been rescanned,
we notice a new piece of hardware.
In this case, I've written it up as a
PCI device discovered during boot.
Well, the host controller driver
is going to create a nub,
an IOPCI device nub.
That's a term we kind of invented that
represents that piece of hardware.
If there's five
PCI devices in the system,
you'll have five separate
IOPCI device nubs,
one that represents
each piece of hardware.
And that nub will register
itself for matching.
This is how matching gets kicked off.
So in step two,
it's called class matching.
This is something that's done
basically in I/O Kit innards.
It's not something that the
family typically alters.
Basically, I/O Kit starts with a list of
all drivers known to the system.
Everything that's been
installed that we're aware of.
[Transcript missing]
At the end of this,
probe scores may have been adjusted.
Now,
the device driver itself is not going
to have adjusted its probe score,
but the family may have.
The family at this point has got
a little more information than
it did in the previous step.
So it may have decided to promote
or move down in priority some driver
based on family-specific criteria.
I know that the USB family implements
the USB matching specification,
and it does, in fact,
affect the probe score.
So again, we have a list sorted by
score at the end of the step.
Ideally, we're down to one driver.
[Transcript missing]
So each of the remaining
drivers is loaded and probed.
And effectively,
they're given the opportunity in C or C++
code to be able to talk to the device,
find out if it is
appropriate for them or not,
adjust their own probe score, and return.
They can say, this device is not
appropriate for me at all.
Or they can say, it is appropriate,
but I want to raise my probe score or
lower my probe score because I discovered
something about it that affects that.
It's pretty rare that you would do that,
but as I said, this is pretty flexible.
Now all the drivers that failed their
probe are unloaded at this point,
they're clearly not of interest.
But the remaining drivers are started,
starting with the highest probe score,
and marching down the list until
one of them successfully starts.
In general if you've passed
your probe you will successfully
pass your start as well,
so it's generally the very first
driver on the list at this point.
But it is possible that you discover
something during start that causes
you to bail on this hardware.
And at that point,
we have a winning driver.
We have a notion of match categories
that you might have noticed in
some I/O Kit documentation in the
tutorials or some other places.
In general, you won't need to use that.
I bring this up only because I've
had a number of questions about it.
The idea there was there
may be multiple drivers
could usefully be attached to
one device at any given time.
And the idea here is you could have one
piece of hardware that maybe is bimodal.
It can operate as a tape drive,
or it can operate as a floor buffer,
whatever.
And effectively,
you can have the floor buffer
driver be in one category,
and it can win for that category.
And you can have the tape drive
driver be in a different category
and win for that category.
And you can only typically
have one driver actually
accessing the device at a time,
so you'd have to go through
open-close to be able to actually
acquire the device and use it.
But that allows you to have
multifunction hardware share drivers.
So if you need to do something like that,
if you have a really interesting
multifunction device,
this may be one technique you can use.
So this matching process, by the way,
is repeated independently
for each match category.
Thank you.
Now, developing inside the
kernel is a bit of an art.
It's not something that we encourage
all of our developers to do.
Obviously, we want the kernel to
be as lean as possible,
but it's also something that
isn't necessary in a lot of cases.
We'll talk a little bit about what it
means to develop inside the kernel.
For now,
you have to use Apple-provided tools.
If you wanted to use Code Warrior or
some other tool for that,
you'll have to contact the provider
of that tool and ask for that support.
Apple is willing to work with other
tool vendors to show them what's
needed to develop in this space,
but presently, you have to use our tools.
When you want to do debugging,
you need to use a two-machine debugger.
We have a debug
environment that uses GDB,
and it uses two machines
connected over Ethernet.
It's a very powerful environment.
There's a lot you can do with it,
but it's probably different,
unless you've already used GDB,
it's probably different than
anything you're used to.
So there's going to be
a learning curve there.
Once you've learned it,
I think you'll find it very powerful.
The fact that you can download
source code from Darwin means that
you can actually do source code
level debugging within the kernel.
Now,
we have restricted language features.
Specifically, a lot of the libraries,
the standard POSIX libraries that
Unix programmers are used to using,
aren't available in the kernel.
Basically, it's a mini environment,
so to speak.
We would encourage you to go and
look at the headers in the kernel
framework to see what's available.
There's also a tool called NM,
which will tell you all the symbols.
So if you're a Unix developer,
there's some symbol you're used
to using and you just want to
find out if it's in the kernel,
it's a very easy way to find out.
Run an NM on the kernel
and find out if it's there.
Also, if you're developing an I/O Kit,
you're going to be using C++.
C++ is available for other types
of kernel extensions as well,
but it's pretty much required
for I/O Kit kernel extensions.
We don't support a full-blown
C++ implementation.
Our initial port of I/O Kit C++
was based on a movement called
Embedded C++ from a few years ago,
and we're going to be evolving
what that means to us.
Basically,
some of the higher-level features
like multiple inheritance,
exceptions, RTTI,
these things are not available.
Also, you really need to use our
constructor metaclasses.
We have our own replacement
for RTTI that's used to
maintain reference counting and
automatically unload drivers.
It keeps track of a lot
of very important things.
If you're writing a driver and
you're making use of objects that
derive from the OSObject class,
which is the root of all I/O Kit objects,
you can use the OSObject class
to make use of the objects that
derive from the OSObject class,
which is the root of all I/O Kit objects.
If you're writing a driver and
you're making use of objects that
derive from the OSObject class,
you can use the OSObject class
to make use of objects that
derive from the OSObject class.
I know this has not been well documented,
and we're working on improving that,
but it is very important.
Otherwise,
you're going to get into situations
that can cause panics and other
crashes because we may decide
to unload your driver because
there's no references of it.
Well, there are references of it,
but our runtime system doesn't know that.
There's very limited user
interaction inside the kernel.
You can't just communicate
with an app directly.
You have to set up
explicit communications.
Now we do have some basic facilities.
We have this kernel user
notification center that allows
you to pop up simple panels,
that allows you to possibly launch an
application if you needed to have a GUI.
But the code that actually
does that is not in the kernel.
The code that would display on the
screen is outside of the kernel.
So you can have your internal
component cooperate with
something out in user space,
but you can't directly talk
to Carbon APIs or toolbox
APIs or anything like that.
Inside the kernel,
resources are much more costly
than they are in user land.
Now, the reason this is so is because
kernel memory is typically wired.
If you allocate memory in the kernel,
unless you go out of
your way to unwire it,
and that's tricky to do,
that memory is wired.
Now, that means that that memory
is permanently unavailable
for other applications,
other components in the system to use.
If that same amount of memory is
being used by some task in user space,
when that task is not active,
those pages will page out,
and that physical memory will become
available for some other entity to use.
So basically,
you don't want to develop inside
the kernel unless you have to.
I think that's probably been made clear.
The last important reason
is failures are fatal.
We want Mac OS X to be the most
stable operating system on the planet.
And obviously,
you want to try to contain failures.
If an application crashes,
we want the application to crash
and not affect anything else.
If you've got something inside
the kernel and it crashes,
it's going to probably
bring the whole system down,
depending on the nature of the failure.
But basically,
if you crash inside the kernel,
You've crashed the system.
That being said,
if you've decided to forge ahead
and write code inside the kernel,
here's how you do it.
You're going to have to
write a kernel extension,
which is basically a package for binary
code to be delivered into the kernel.
Now, you can write a kernel extension
that doesn't exist inside one of
the three well-defined frameworks,
but it's not really going to do very
much because nobody's going to call it.
So, you really are going to be looking
at one of these three universes:
the I/O Kit universe,
the kernel network extensions,
NKE universe, or file system plug-ins.
The three of them use
fairly different APIs,
so I can't go into any
specifics for the latter two.
But basically,
the idea is the kernel extensions
are there to deliver binary code
into one of these universes,
and then the APIs that are appropriate
in that space take over from there.
An extension in classic
Mac OS is not necessarily a
kernel extension on Mac OS X.
If you've delivered functionality
in the past using an extension,
it may not be appropriate
to do that on X.
You need to stop and think about the
best way to package your functionality.
So get inside the kernel
only if you have to.
So a kernel extension is the
way to get into the kernel.
If you want to do something a
little bit more interesting,
kernel extensions can also serve as
libraries to other kernel extensions.
It's a relatively straightforward
layering mechanism.
So let's say that you're writing a
family of drivers for your company
that share a common service library.
So you've got a USB version of something
and a FireWire version of something,
and 90% of the code is the same,
but you need to have some
bus-specific code as well.
You can write a library, effectively,
that contains that 90% common code.
And then you can write a kernel
extension that depends on that
library for the bus-specific details.
And when you've done that,
you've basically just written a family.
That's the way families work.
They're just a library that has
leaf classes plugged into it.
So how do you actually go
about writing a library?
There's really only a couple things
you have to do that are unique.
First off, you have to identify yourself
by a CFBundle identifier
and a CFBundle version.
These are properties in the PList.
Not too onerous,
you have to do this whether
you're writing a library or not,
all kernel extensions have that.
But you indicate that you are a,
I didn't put it on the slide,
you indicate that you're a
library by expressing the
OS bundle compatible version,
which basically says this is the oldest
version to which I'm binary compatible.
And that is the clue to the system that,
aha, this is a library and somebody
can try to link against this.
Somebody wanting to make use of
a library indicates this through
the OS Bundle Libraries property.
Basically,
you list all the libraries on which you
depend when you write a kernel extension.
Here's a list of some of them.
The list is very long.
The first five on this list are
components of the kernel itself.
You could say I depend on
com.apple.kernel and pick a version
number based on one that we've shipped.
And that basically means you're dependent
on some version of the whole kernel.
Most of you won't need to do that
because you're only going to be
including API from I/O Kit and
maybe from Mach and Libkern as well.
But basically we've subdivided
the kernel into four other pieces:
Mach, BSD, I/O Kit, and Libkern.
And you need to list these explicitly
in your kernel extension when
you're writing an I/O Kit driver.
We recommend that I/O Kit drivers list
com.apple.kernel I/O Kit as a dependency,
as well as libkern because that's
where all the OS objects are defined,
and Mach because you're going to
be using primitives from Mach for
return codes and things like that.
You're also going to want to
list the specific family on which
you depend if you are writing a
driver that depends on a family,
which most of you will be.
So for example,
if you're writing a driver
for a USB controller card
that sits on a PCI bus,
you would need to include the
PCI family and the USB family.
They're the two families
that you depend on.
So now to actually talk about
kernel extensions and how
they exist on the file system,
we've got a series of slides
here that explodes it.
If you look at this,
this is a directory hierarchy.
And you'll see that there's
only two files in here.
The rest of it's all structure.
We basically chose to mirror
the application bundle format,
because all of our tools
are there to deal with it.
Finder already knows
how to deal with these,
and they have some nice
features about them.
It's probably a little bit
more than strictly necessary
for delivering drivers,
but it doesn't really cost anything.
So there are really two files in a
typical kernel extension that are
going to be interesting to you.
The first one is this Info.plist.
Every bundle of any description on
Mac OS X has one of these files.
And basically, it is the--
The I/O Kit is a table of
contents for the kernel extension.
It provides information on what it is,
why it would need to be loaded.
This is where the I/O Kit personalities
with the matching information goes.
I've listed four basic properties
here that are pretty much going to
be necessary for all I/O Kit drivers.
The first is the C/F Bundle Identifier.
The C/F Bundle Identifier
identifies your driver.
We've gone with a reverse
DNS namespace because this doesn't
really require Apple to put some kind
of a program together and police it.
Basically,
if you can sign up for a domain name,
put it in reverse order.
For Apple,
we ship drivers and other components
under the name com.apple.whatever.
Obviously, unless you work for Apple,
you shouldn't be doing that.
You should be providing
your own company name there.
Once you get within
your company database,
you can use the C/F Bundle
Identifier to identify your driver.
The other thing that's important
is that within your company domain,
you can decide whatever namespace
within that that you want.
It's actually pretty flexible.
It tends to be a little verbose,
but that's okay.
This information is usually only thrown
around when we're loading drivers.
Once they're loaded,
it's just sitting around as information.
Your CFBundle version is
also going to be important.
Our version checking code makes use
of this to know that it's getting the
latest and greatest piece of software.
So right now the format is specified
as a classic Mac OS Verse resource,
something you're probably
familiar with already.
OS bundle libraries,
this is where you list all of the
libraries on which you depend.
So com.apple I/O Kit.whateverfamily,
all the libraries that you care about.
It's very important to understand
that Mac OS X as it's shipped so far
doesn't enforce all of these properties.
It makes note of them and it
does its best to use them,
but we didn't have time to get all
of our drivers into compliance,
so we have to allow them
to be a little bit fuzzy.
Future releases of the Mac OS X operating
system are going to require that these
be in order or your driver will not load.
So for example,
if you don't have a CFBundle identifier,
it won't load.
I don't think it would load.
It wouldn't load today actually
because that's key to a lot of things.
If you don't have a bundle version,
it won't load.
If you don't list any bundle libraries,
Because by definition,
if all you're doing is
calling into the kernel,
the kernel is acting as your library.
You have to list at least
one thing as a dependency.
Otherwise your kernel extension
could not call any API.
And if nobody's calling you
and you're not calling anybody,
it's kind of a useless kernel extension.
And the fourth property here,
I/O Kit personalities,
this is the only one
that's I/O Kit specific.
This is where you would list all of
the personalities of your driver.
This is a little subtle.
By and large, your drivers will have
a single personality.
That is, one set of matching criteria,
a few properties to help your driver
get oriented when it gets loaded.
But you could also have
multiple personalities.
You could have, say,
two PCI cards that you ship that
are similar but slightly different,
and they need different match criteria.
Well, one driver could drive them,
but you could list two personalities,
one for each of those flavors.
It's very powerful.
We use this ourselves.
We have several
multi-personality drivers.
As a very useful resource,
go into the extensions folder on 10
and poke around and see what's there.
Though I will warn you, as I said,
not all of our drivers are in spec.
So we'll also look at the log
that comes out and see all
the warnings that get posted.
The warnings are on our drivers as well.
well.
The next file that's important here is
the binary that the KEXT is delivering.
In this case I've
exploded the USB family,
but this is the actual binary file.
First and foremost, it's optional,
which may seem a little bit odd.
The kernel extension is a
way to deliver binaries.
What does it mean to have it be optional?
We have a notion of a driverless
driver that is used occasionally,
and this is where personalities come in.
You're in your personality,
your I/O Kit personality,
you will specify the class,
the basic class for your driver,
and you'll also specify the
CFBundle identifier for the kernel
extension that contains the binary code.
You could write a driver that
depends on some other driver,
and actually just instantiates
its classes directly.
There are a few cases
where this is useful.
Basically, you would put in some new
property in the personality.
Maybe it's as simple as
changing the probe score.
I want to use this driver over here,
but I want to make it
slightly different matching,
and I want to have a higher probe score.
Okay, enough said about that.
If you do have a binary there,
it's going to be in the MacO format,
which is the only format
the kernel will load.
Please run strip-x on
it before shipping it.
I've looked at some of the
drivers that have been posted.
Obviously, I'm interested.
Some developers have
forgotten to run this,
and it means that their
download size is about 10 times
larger than it needs to be.
They're giving away all
their debugging symbols.
It doesn't affect the runtime at all.
We only load the important
pieces into the kernel.
But if you want to have faster downloads,
strip-x is a good thing to do.
Okay, last is this plugins folder inside
the kernel extension contents.
And this is kind of neat.
Again, it's optional.
If you have a plugins folder,
it gives you a place to deliver
other kernel extensions.
The reason you'd want to do this is
for the drag and drop functionality.
Let's say you've got a family, well,
family collection of three or four
drivers that you always want to move
around together as a collection.
What you can do is pick one that is
sort of the definitive KEXT and then
put all of the other pieces as subkexts,
as we call them,
inside the plugin folder.
The advantage there is to the user,
it appears to be one kernel extension.
To our loading system, however,
we consider every kernel extension equal,
so we don't care whether it's
embedded or at the top level.
That's actually important to note.
The fact that it's embedded
doesn't mean anything at all.
It's just a way to deliver it.
Now, the Plugins folder can
contain other texts.
It can also contain device
interface libraries.
This would be typically if you're
writing a driver with some sort of
a custom interface that applications
would need to get at directly.
Or if you're writing a family and
you want to provide a user client or
device interface for an application,
that's a handy place to
store the bundle for that.
And in the future,
there will probably be other
things of interest that could
go in that Plugins folder.
It's sort of a generic
place to put add-ons.
Only one level of nesting is supported,
though.
You can't have a kernel extension
inside a kernel extension
inside a kernel extension.
Well, we could have made this work.
But there was very little use for it.
The user sees the top level.
That's our intent.
You can package things internally.
If we want to have more complex
relationships and organizations,
send us notes on how you'd
like to have that done.
I don't think creating a massive
tree inside the extensions folder is
necessarily the right way to do that.
All right, now I want to talk about
the user kernel boundary.
This is new, I think,
to developers just coming in from 9,
looking at 10.
There are different places on Mac OS X,
different address spaces.
Drivers live inside the kernel.
Applications live outside the kernel.
So anytime your app needs
to talk to a driver,
you've got to cross that boundary.
It's as simple as that.
There's no way around it.
Mac OS X and the Darwin kernel and
infrastructure provide a large number
of ways to get across that boundary.
If you can use a sufficiently
high abstraction,
like a file system,
the file system provides
that bridge for you.
It makes use of BSD to cross that
bridge and get data out of the
kernel and into your application.
Networking,
Sockets does that for you as well.
But if you can't use a high
level abstraction and you have
to use a low level abstraction,
you've got to get directly at a device,
you can use,
basically it's a CFPlugin interface
that we use called a device interface.
Oh, and the class,
the in-kernel class that you
derive from is I/O User Client.
The name derives from the fact
that from the kernel's perspective,
the client is a user.
Therefore, the object is a user client.
So your code belongs outside the kernel
unless you must process interrupts.
If you have to get at an interrupt,
you need to be inside the kernel.
Unless you have to deliver
services to an in-kernel component,
for example,
file systems live inside the kernel.
So if you're writing a disk
driver and the disk is most likely
going to be used by file systems,
it makes sense for that driver
to live inside the kernel.
It is possible, of course,
to put almost anything you
want outside the kernel,
but then moving data means more
user kernel boundary crossings,
and that costs a lot of time,
so you're not going to get a
huge amount of performance.
But if it's a really slow device,
you can have drivers live
outside and tunnel back and forth
across the user kernel boundary.
The other reason for putting
something inside the kernel would
be if it provides a service that's
needed by a large number of clients
and it's needed much of the time.
Now,
this is kind of a judgment call here,
but basically the kernel is
sort of the only guaranteed
rendezvous mechanism on the system.
An app running in Darwin or Cocoa or
Carbon can pretty much guarantee it's
there and there are APIs to get at it.
So if you've got a service that's
available inside the kernel,
it's a convenient rendezvous mechanism.
But if you only have one client
that needs to get at your device,
or if it's only used 1% of the time,
why put it in the kernel?
That memory is going to
be used all of the time,
not just when it's in use.
So an example there
might be a backup driver,
a device driver that's
only used to do backups.
Most people aren't backing
up all of the time.
You could have one application that could
load such a driver when it needs it,
or it could process it in
user space and then unload it
when it's no longer needed.
So the device interface model,
this is sort of the app view of I/O Kit.
The device interface model
provides API access for
many devices in the system.
It doesn't provide
access for all devices.
This is important.
We don't provide access for applications
to directly get at the PCI bus.
We do let you get at devices
hanging off the PCI bus,
so if you've got a SCSI controller there,
you can talk to the SCSI bus,
but you can't talk to the PCI bus.
It's actually a security issue there.
Also,
there are some devices it really doesn't
make sense to get at from user space,
so we don't create the ability to cross
that boundary for every kind of device.
But the ability is there if we need
to make use of it in the future.
The device interface model wraps
a number of Mach mechanisms.
Basically, since Mach is the IPC model,
everything that we do is
simply a wrapper for that.
And our idea there is for I/O Kit to
make the most common uses of the
Mach infrastructure easy to use.
I/O User Client provides this.
So, system calls.
[Transcript missing]
So to a driver,
this boundary crossing layer really
looks like an in-kernel client,
a subclass of I/O user client.
The object I/O user client
is inside the kernel.
It's talking to the driver like
any other in-kernel component.
It's just moving that data across the
user kernel boundary as its primary goal.
To an application,
it looks like typically a CFPlugin,
generally Maco binary,
that's the preferred format.
But basically, it is
There's proxies in both space.
The proxy in the user
space is a CFPlugin,
and the proxy in the kernel
space is an I/O user client.
They're geared to talk to each other,
and your app talks to the CFBundle,
the CFPlugin,
and the I/O Kit driver is going
to talk to the user client.
So, I'm going to go through a four-step
sequence here of how this works.
So from an application,
the first thing to do is
find the device of interest.
And the way you do that is by
searching the I-O registry.
There's a number of different ways to
search the I-O registry and discover
the device or devices of interest,
but probably the most common and
most useful one is I-O service
get matching services.
This basically allows you to find all
of the instances of I-O SCSI device or
all the instances of I-O USB device.
And you can provide some further
match criteria that is driven
actually very similarly to
the way driver matching works.
But basically,
you find the devices of interest,
and you get a list back,
and you use I-O Iterator Next to
actually walk through that list.
And when you find the
device you're interested in,
you make note of it.
And in step two...
You're going to need to call
I/O Create Plugin Interface for Service,
if this is a CFPlugin style user client.
The technique here is to take the
cookie that you got from searching the
I/O registry and request a session here.
So you basically create
a plugin interface.
This loads the CFBundle into
your application,
and then you call Query Interface,
which actually returns an
interface to the desired device.
All right, at this point,
you actually don't own the device.
You just have an interface to the device.
I/O Kit has multiple layers here.
Because we also have multiple
clients competing for devices.
They might all want to have a
session going to the device,
but they don't want to
keep it open all the time.
They want to be a good citizen
and close it periodically to allow
others the opportunity to use it.
So in this case,
the details are family specific.
But basically, it follows a pretty basic
open I/O close procedure here.
There's nothing really surprising there.
Ideally,
you call open as late as possible.
And you call close as early
and as often as possible.
Because as long as you
have a device open,
nobody else is going to
be able to get at it.
Each family will instrument
its own arbitration policy.
But in general, assume mutual exclusion,
unless you've heard something else.
And ideally,
if you're doing something to a
device that only takes a few seconds,
open it.
Do that I/O and close it.
You only keep it open
if you really need to.
Because it's in some volatile state
that you can't easily restore.
Or it doesn't make sense for
it to trade owners briefly.
And the last step is to release
the interface to the device.
This just cleans things up.
If your app crashes,
this gets done for you.
But ideally,
you explicitly clean this up.
There is a release note.
I'm sorry,
I don't have a more specific reference,
but if you go to the ADC website,
you should be able to
search for this and find it.
CFBundle and CFPlugins release
note describe a lot of the APIs,
the app-level APIs.
Now, I want to talk for a little while
about the different app models.
I gave you a rundown of how to do that,
assuming that your app could
talk to a Mako plug-in.
But there's a number of different
application spaces on Mac OS X.
So for starters,
let's take a classic application.
Well, there's no direct I/O Kit access
for a classic application.
It wouldn't be a compatibility
environment if it included
all the I/O Kit APIs.
So basically,
whatever is present in classic,
whatever abstractions are there,
that's what you get.
All communications go
through classic itself.
The same is true for a pure Carbon app.
If you're writing a Carbon app in
CFM and you're keeping it pure,
you're only calling Carbon APIs,
you only get what's in Carbon.
I mean, that's kind of the definition
of a pure Carbon app.
So you go through the Carbon framework
and that's how you get down into
the kernel and get at drivers.
But there's not a
tremendous amount there.
Now it starts to get a little
bit more interesting when you are
willing to do Mac OS X specific
code in your application.
And in this case we've got
a CFM Carbon application.
which has basically two
ways to talk to I/O Kit.
One is through Carbon in
places like I/O SCSI Action,
where we've actually provided some
Carbon APIs for device access.
You can make use of that.
But you can also make use of
the plugin architecture that
I described in the previous slides.
Now the coloration here is
a little bit of a giveaway.
The orange represents
parts of the Darwin kernel,
things that Apple provides you.
The purple is the app
environment that you're using.
And the blue boxes on the top are the
boxes that represent code that you write.
You write the application itself,
and you write the CFBundle that provides
the interface down into I/O Kit.
Now this is actually kind of handy
because it allows you to write a
different plugin for running on Mac OS 9.
So you can write one application
that runs on 9 or 10 and it
would load an operating system
specific plugin to do its I/O.
Now if you're writing a MacO Carbon app,
it actually eliminates a layer there.
You don't have to have the
plug-in because you're not
switching over from CFM to MacO.
You can directly call the
plug-ins that I/O Kit provides.
And of course you can still go
through the Carbon environment
that's always available to you.
And the same is true for a Cocoa app.
Basically,
you can go through Cocoa or you
can go through the CFPlugin.
What I don't have up here
is a pure BSD application,
but a BSD application has all the
CFPlugin stuff available to it,
plus all the BSD APIs as well.
So I don't have any other
details on I/O Kit for you today.
What I do have is a rather lengthy
roadmap for other sessions,
because that's where the details
are going to be conveyed to you.
There are sessions on graphics,
actually right after this session.
There is sessions on image capture,
sessions on
Input devices, Firewire, USB.
Spend a little time looking through
your guide if you haven't already and
figure out which ones are going to
have information most relevant to you.
There's a lot of details,
there's a lot of API that fits
under the I/O Kit umbrella.
And yet another page of them.